Self-managed super fund property rules: You can only buy property through your SMSF if you comply with the rules. The property must: meet the 'sole purpose test' of solely providing retirement benefits to fund members, not be acquired from a related party of a member, not be lived in by a fund member or any fund members' related parties, not be rented by a fund member or any fund members' related parties. If your SMSF purchases a commercial premises, it can be leased to a fund member for their business. However, it must be leased at the market rate and follow specific rules. The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has more information about buying property using your self-managed super fund.

What an SMSF property can cost you: SMSF property sales may have many fees and charges. These fees can add up and will reduce your super balance. Find out all the costs before signing up. Costs include: upfront fees, legal fees, advice fees, stamp duty, ongoing property management fees such as maintenance, rates, and insurance, commissions payable to developers and real estate agents, bank fees and loan costs, such as interest.Be wary of groups of advisers who recommend each other's services. The referral fees they receive can create conflicts of interest. This may influence the advice you receive to set up an SMSF as well as the investments and specific services recommended.It is important to get advice from a licensed financial adviser. Anyone who gives advice on an SMSF must have an Australian financial services (AFS) licence. ASIC Connect's Professional Registers will tell you if the company or person holds an AFS licence or is authorised to provide financial advice.See property investment for more information.

SMSF borrowing to purchase property: Borrowing or gearing your super into property involves very strict borrowing conditions. It's called a 'limited recourse borrowing arrangement' (LRBA). You can only purchase a single asset with a LRBA. For example, a residential or commercial property. The ATO has more information about limited recourse borrowing arrangements. You should assess whether investing in property is consistent with the investment strategy and risk profile of your SMSF. Borrowing adds complexity to your SMSF, so it's important to get advice from a licensed financial adviser. Ask the financial adviser to explain the following risks. SMSF property risks include: Higher costs – SMSF property loans tend to be more costly than other property loans. Cash flow – Your fund must always have sufficient liquidity or cash flow to meet expenses. These may include the loan repayments, insurance premiums for the property and other property expenses such as rates or property management. The fund may also need to allow for retirement pension payments or lump sum withdrawals. Loan balance - You need to ensure there is a strategy in place to repay the loan in the event of illness, disability or death of members, or rental vacancy. Hard to cancel – If your SMSF property loan documents and contract aren't set up correctly, you can't unwind the arrangement. You may have to sell the property, potentially causing substantial losses to the SMSF. Possible tax losses – You can't offset tax losses from the property against your taxable income outside the fund. No alterations to the property – You can't make alterations that change the character of the property until you pay off the SMSF property loan. See borrowing to invest for more information on the risks of gearing.

Property developers and SMSFs: Property developers must have an AFS licence if they provide financial advice. Financial advice includes advice on setting up an SMSF. Property developers may have a pre-existing business relationship with the professionals they recommended. They may receive a referral fee or other benefits that could amount to thousands of dollars. Don't be pressured into making property purchase decisions for an SMSF. Watch out for sales tactics like competitions, free flights to sales meetings or being taken out for free meals. Think twice about investing in property markets you are not familiar with. Do your own research first. Make sure you get financial advice from someone who has an AFS licence. See questions to ask a financial adviser for talking points you can use to check for sales incentives.