Acting on a hot tip might sound like a good idea when investing but if that hot tip is inside information, it might lead to heavy fines or prison time.

What is insider trading?: Insider trading is when you trade in a financial product (for example, shares, options or derivatives of a listed company) while knowing information that is not public. Your trade could impact the value or price of the investment. It’s also insider trading if you act on sensitive information that could affect the value of a company’s competitor or supplier. When you have inside information, it is also illegal to recommend, suggest, or ask others to buy, sell or even not to trade the investment. Also, you must not tip off anyone who would be likely to trade on that information. Examples of inside information include: details of an upcoming takeover or merger, details of upcoming financial results, knowledge of major customer contracts or strategic partnerships, knowledge of changes in executive leadership or board restructure. Even if you trade on inside information and it turns out to be false, you can still be charged with insider trading. You could also be charged if you tried to get someone else to trade for you, even if that person did not act on it.

Who has access to inside information?: Company insiders are often the source of inside information. They typically include the Board of directors, the executive management team, and staff with access to sensitive information (for example, they work in the finance department). Other people who may have access to inside information are those advising a company on a fundraising transaction or other confidential company business. They may include financiers, consultants, brokers, lawyers, and major shareholders.

Penalties for insider trading: The Australian Securities & Investments Commission (ASIC) monitors Australian markets in real-time for insider trading and other market misconduct. By combining trading data with other data sources, ASIC can identify traders, networks of connected parties and analyse trading patterns. If you are found guilty of insider trading, you may face up to 15 years in prison. You could be fined up to $1.565 million or three times the profits gained, or the loss avoided, whichever is greater. You could also be disqualified from managing a company for up to 5 years. The penalties for insider trading are even greater for companies.

Why insider trading is illegal: Insider trading undermines fairness and trust in Australia’s financial markets. It has impacts beyond those who invest directly in financial products, for example, those who have superannuation.  In a transparent market all participants should receive access to information at the same time. Someone who uses non-public price sensitive information to trade gains a financial advantage over the rest of the market. Australia has one of the cleanest financial markets in the world and maintains this through tight legal restrictions.

How to avoid insider trading: As an individual: Do your own research and make your investment decisions based on publicly available information.; Never trade based on inside information received from others.; If you come across inside information, do not share that information with others, and do not act on that information yourself. As a finance professional or company insider: Familiarize yourself with your company’s share trading policy, blackout periods and trading windows.; Do not share sensitive information about the company with others.; If you are a director or major shareholder, disclose your trades and holdings to the market to ensure transparency. 

Report insider trading to ASIC: The Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) regulates Australia’s financial markets. If you see or suspect insider trading, report it to ASIC.